#  2024-01-15 Pilot 2 Report

## 1. Background
In this pilot experiment, we want to select 10 qualified questions that will be asked in our main experiment, 
(**3 predictions + 3 controversial issues + 2 hard facts**). The 3 prediction questions are of a similar topic so that we could get a more consistent reponse from each participant by calculating the average of their 3 answers, which also applies for the 3 controversial issues.

We require the qualified questions to meet certain criteria. They are prioritized as follows:
- The answer of these questions should have no or small correlation with the partipant's revealed ideology.
- Answers of the 3 questions from the same topic should have strong correlation with each other.
- The average answer should be close to zero.
- The answer should also have no or small correlation with the extreme degree of the participant's revealed ideology, which can be measured by the absolute value of the ideology.

Besides, we'd also like to explore whether the order of asking similar questions may influence their answer patterns.

## 2. Basic Settings
**50** Participants were engaged in the experiment, during which a total of **11** questions are posed:
1. Choose one's ideology from -2 to 2 **continuously**
2. Prediction 1 (variation 1)
3. Controversial issue 1 (variation 1)
4. Prediction 1 (variation 2)
5. Controversial issue 1 (variation 2)
6. Prediction 1 (variation 3)
7. Controversial issue 1 (variation 3)
8. Prediction 1 (variation 4)
9. Controversial issue 1 (variation 4)
10. Hard fact 1
11. Hard fact 2

Some of the variations are asked in a reversed way. For example:
- *The government should invest more scientific research funding into space exploration instead of virtual reality technology.*
- *I think development of artificial intelligence should take priority over space engineering.*

As the range is [-3, 3], the answer of the questions like the second one are preprocessed by calculating its negative number.

## 2. Answer Pattern of Each Question

(The ideology-answer distribution figure for each question can be seen in the appended page.)

- **Correlation**: Most of the questions have a relatively medium correlation of ideology and answer (> 0.2), even for one of the hard fact questions we've previously selected. I'm still exploring why this is the case, but the reason could be the order of the questions, or that this time we use a continuous measure of ideology, instead of a discrete one.
- **Average**: Almost all questions have an answer average between 0.5 to 0.5, except for one variation of the prediction question.
- **Correlation with the extreme degree of ideology**: Almost all questions have a correlation between -0.1 and 0.1, except for the same variation of the prediction question.

The outlier is shown as follows: *"Consider a scenario where there are two strategies to save humanity from extinction: Plan A involves expanding human life into outer space, while Plan B focuses on transitioning human existence into virtual reality. In this context, I would favor Plan A over Plan B."*
    
## 3. Pattern Between Questions
### 3.1 Order of the questions
The pearsonr correlation between the sequence of a variation (could be 0, 1, 2, 3) in its answer group, and its answer is only 0.07, with a p-value about 0.2.
However, if we manually check the answer of each variation, great differences still exist. For example, for this statement *"The government should invest more scientific research funding into space exploration instead of virtual reality technology."*, when it's asked in the first, second, third or fourth place, the average answer is -0.52, 0.93, 0.29 and 1.3 respectively.
As the sample number is small (about 10 for each), the observed fluctuation could be regarded as within reasonable bounds.

### 3.2 Correlation between variations

Correlation matrix for the prediction question:

|  | V1 | V2 | V3 | V4 |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| V1 | - | 0.53 | 0.44 | 0.60 |
| V2 | 0.53 | - | 0.29 | 0.81 |
| V3 | 0.44 | 0.29 | - | 0.31 |
| V4 | 0.60 | 0.81 | 0.31 | - |

Correlation matrix for the controversial issue question:

|  | V1 | V2 | V3 | V4 |
| -- | -- | -- | -- | -- |
| V1 | - | 0.47 | 0.85 | 0.49 |
| V2 | 0.47 | - | 0.50 | 0.81 |
| V3 | 0.85 | 0.50 | - | 0.49 |
| V4 | 0.49 | 0.81 | 0.49 | - |

Except for the third variation of the prediction question group, all variations show great correlations in answers with the others.

## 4. What To Do Next
- Explore why the average answer of some questions diverges a lot from zero
- Increase the number of participants to further explore the effect of question order
- Probably rethink some of the questions